a herd of wildebeest a shoal of fish a
flock of birds many animals gather in
large groups that are among the most
wonderful spectacles in the natural
world why do these groups fall the
common answers include things like
seeking safety and numbers or hunting in
packs or gathering to mate or breed and
all of these explanations while often
true make a huge assumption about animal
behavior that the animals are in control
of their own actions that they are in
charge of their bodies and that is often
not the case this is our tamiya a brine
shrimp you probably know her better as a
sea monkey its small and it typically
lives alone but it can gather in these
large red swarms that span 4 meters and
these form because of a parasite these
shrimp are infected with a tapeworm a
tapeworm is effectively a long living
gut with genitals at one end and a
hooked mouth at the other as a freelance
journalist I sympathize the tape the
tapeworm drains nutrients from artemius
body but it also does other things it
castrates them it makes it changes their
colour from transparent to bright red it
makes them live longer and as biologist
Nicolas Road has found it makes them
swim in groups why because the tapeworm
like many other parasites has a
complicated life cycle involving many
different hosts the shrimp are just one
step on its journey its ultimate
destination is this the greater
flamingos only the flamingos can the
tapeworm reproduce so to get there it
manipulates its shrimp hosts into
forming these conspicuous coloured
swarms that are easier for a flamingo to
spot and to devour and that is the
secret of the artemius warm
they aren't sociable through their own
volition but because they are being
controlled it's not safety in numbers
it's actually the exact opposite
the tapeworm hijacks their brains in
their bodies turning them into vehicles
for getting itself into a flamingo and
here is another example of a parasitic
manipulation this is a suicidal cricket
this cricket swallowed the larvae of a
Gordian worm or horsehair worm the worm
grew to adult size within it but it
needs to get into water in order to mate
and it does that by releasing proteins
that add all the crickets brain causing
it to behave erratically when the
cricket nears a body of water such as
the swimming pool it jumps in and drowns
and the worm wriggles out of it's
suicidal corpse crickets are really
roomy who knew the tapeworm and the
Gordian worm are not alone they are part
of an entire cavalcade of mind
controlling parasites of fungi and back
on viruses and worms and insects in more
that all specialize in subverting and
overriding the Wills of their hosts now
I first learned about this way of life
through David Attenborough's trials of
life about 20 years ago and then later
through a wonderful book called parasite
Rex by my friend Carl Zimmer and I've
been writing about these creatures ever
since few topics in biology and throw me
more it's like the parasites have
subverted my own brain because after all
they are always compelling and they are
delightfully macabre when you write
about parasites your lexicon swells with
phrases like devoured alive and burst
out of its body but there's more to it
than that I'm a writer and fellow
writers in the audience will know that
we love stories and parasites invite us
to resist the allure of obvious stories
their world is one of plot twists and
unexpected explanations why for example
does this caterpillar start violently
thrashing about when another insect gets
close to it and there's white cocoons
that it seems to be spending guard over
is it maybe protecting its siblings no
this caterpillar was attacked by a
parasitic wasp which laid eggs inside it
the eggs hatched and the young wasps
devoured the Casper alive before birth
out of its body see what I mean now um
the caterpillar didn't die some of the
wasps seem to stay behind and controlled
it into defending their siblings which
are metamorphosing into adults within
those cocoons this caterpillar is a head
banging zombie bodyguard defending the
offspring of the creature that killed it
we have a lot to get through I only have
13 minutes
now some of you are probably just
desperately clawing for some solace in
the idea that these things are oddities
of the natural world that they are
outliers and that point of view is
understandable because by their nature
parasites are quite small and they spend
a lot of time inside the bodies of other
things they're easy to overlook but that
doesn't mean that they are unimportant a
few years back a man called Kevin
Lafferty took a group of scientists into
three Californian estuaries and they're
pretty much weighed and dissected and
recorded everything they could find and
what they found were parasites in
extreme abundance especially common were
tremor toads tiny worms that specialize
in castrating their hosts like this
unfortunate snail now a single trauma
toad is tiny microscopic but
collectively they weighed as much as all
the fish in the estuaries and three to
nine times more than all the birds and
remember the Gordian worm that I showed
you the cricket thing one Japanese
scientist called Takuya Soto found that
in one stream these things drive so many
crickets and grasshoppers into the water
that the drowned insects make up some
60% of the diet of local trout
manipulation is not an oddity it is a
critical and common part of the world
around us and scientists have now found
hundreds of examples of such
manipulators and their more excitingly
they're starting to understand exactly
how these creatures control their hosts
and this is one of my favorite examples
this is am Colette's compressor the
emerald cockroach wasp
and it is a truth universally
acknowledged that an emerald cockroach
wasp in possession of some fertilized
eggs must be in one of a cockroach
when she finds one she stabs it with a
stinger that is also a sense organ this
discovery came out three weeks ago stabs
it with a stinger that as a sense organ
equipped with small sensory bumps that
allow her to feel the distinctive
texture of a roaches brain so like a
person blindly rooting about in a bag
she finds the brain and she injects it
with venom into two very specific
clusters of neurons Israeli scientists
Fredrik Libous are and Ram Gao found
that the venom is a very specific
chemical weapon it doesn't kill the
roach nor does it sedate it the roach
could walk away or fly or run if it
chose to but it doesn't choose to
because the venom Nyx's its motivation
to walk and only that the wasp basically
unchecks the escape from danger box in
the roaches operating system allowing
her to lead hit her helpless victim back
to her lair by its antennae like a
person walking a dog and once there she
lays an egg on a egg hatches devoured a
live birth out of body idea the other
you know drill now I would argue that
once stung the cockroach isn't a roach
anymore it's more of an extension of the
wasp just like the cricket was an
extension of the Gordian worm these
hosts won't get to survive or reproduce
they have as much control over their own
fates as my car once the parasites get
in the hosts don't get a say now humans
of course are no stranger to
manipulation we take drugs to shift the
chemistry's of our brains and to change
our moods and what our arguments or
advertising or Big Ideas if not an
attempt to influence someone else's mind
but our attempts are doing this our
crude and blundering compared to the
frying grain specificity of the
parasites Don Draper only wishes he was
an elegant and precise as the emerald
cockroach wasp now I think this is part
of what makes parasites so sinister and
so compelling we place such a premium on
our free will and our independence that
the prospect of losing those qualities
to forces unseen in four
many of our deeper societal fears
Orwellian dystopias and shadowy cobbles
and mind-controlling supervillains
these are tropes that fill our darkest
fiction but in nature they happen all
the time which leads me to an obvious
and disquieting question are their dark
sinister parasites that are influencing
our behavior without us knowing about it
besides the NSA if there are any I've
got a red dot on my forehead no don't
if there are any this is a good
candidate for this is Toxoplasma gondii
i or toxo for short because the
terrifying creature always deserves a
cute nickname
toxo infects mammals a wide variety of
mammals but it can only sexually
reproduce in a cat and scientists like
Joanne Webster have shown that if toxo
gets into a rat or a mouse
it turns the rodent into a cat seeking
missile if the infected rat smells the
delightful odor of cat piss it runs to
words the source of the smell rather
than the more sensible direction of a
way the cat eats the rat toxo gets to
have sex it's a classic tale of Eat Pray
Love
we're very charitable generous people hi
Elizabeth I love to talk right how does
the parasite control its host in this
way we don't really know we know that
toxo releases an enzyme that makes
dopamine a substance involved in reward
and motivation we know a target certain
parts of a rodents brain including those
involved in sexual arousal but how those
puzzle pieces fit together is not
immediately clear what is clear is that
this thing is a single cell this is no
nervous system it is no consciousness it
doesn't even have a body but it's
manipulating a mammal we are mammals are
we are more intelligent than a mere rat
to be sure but our brains have the same
basic structure the same types of cells
the same chemicals running through them
and the same parasites estimates vary a
lot but some figures suggest that 1 in 3
people around the world have talked so
in their brains
typically this doesn't lead to any overt
illness and the parasite holds up in a
dormant state for a long period of time
but there's some evidence that those
people who are carriers have slightly
did also likely differently on
personality questionnaires than other
people
that they have a slightly higher risk of
car accidents and there's some evidence
that people with schizophrenia are more
likely to be infected now I think this
evidence is still inconclusive
and even among toxo researchers opinion
is divided as to whether the parasite is
truly influencing our behavior but given
the widespread nature of such
manipulations it will be completely
implausible for humans to be the only
species that weren't similarly affected
and I think that this capacity to
constantly subvert our way of thinking
about the world makes parasites amazing
they're constantly inviting us to look
at the natural world sideways and to ask
if the behaviors we're seeing whether
they're simple and obvious or baffling
and puzzling or not the results of
individuals acting through their own
accord but because they are being bent
to the control of something else and
while that I do may be disquieting and
while parasites habits may be very
grisly I think that ability to surprise
us makes them as wonderful and as
charismatic as any pandal butterfly or
dolphin
at the end of on the origin of the
species Charles Darwin writes about the
grandeur of life and of endless forms
most beautiful and most wonderful and I
like to think he could easily have been
talking about a tapeworm that makes
shrimps sociable or a wasp that takes
cockroaches for walks but perhaps that's
just a parasite talking thank you
[Applause]